Starting to reformat loops into a unified concept (#2773)
exercism/java: concepts/loops/about.md

Reviewer: I think this content should also talk about the `break` and `continue` keywords, even if it's not covered by the exercise. They are a vital part of looping constructs.

Author: Done!

# About

> In Java there are four looping constructs, two that are condition centric: `while` and `do-while` and the other two are iteration centric: `for` and `for-each`.

Reviewer: Maybe it makes sense to rewrite this sentence to list the constructs in the order in which they are described below, so `for`, `for-each`, `while`, `do-while`.

Author: Done!

> In Java there are four looping constructs, two that are condition centric: `while` and `do-while` and the other two are iteration centric: `for` and `for-each`.

Author: Done!

## For

> A for loop provides a mechanism to execute a group of statements repeatedly until some condition is met.

Reviewer: Ironically this sentence talks about `for` using a condition, where the first paragraph lists `while` and `do-while` as being condition-centric and `for`/`for-each` being something else 😜

Author: Done!

```java
for (initialization; test; update) {
    body;
}
```

The `initialization` sets an initial state for the loop and is executed exactly once at the start of the loop.
Typically it declares and assigns a variable used in the test expression and update statement.
For example:

```java
int i = 1
```

The `test` expression tests if the loop should end.
If it evaluates to `true`, the body and then the update expression will be executed.
If it evaluates to `false`, neither the body nor the update statement will be executed and execution resumes after the loop's closing bracket.
Typically it checks the variable assigned in the initialization block.
For example:

```java
i <= 10
```

After executing the loop body, the `update` expression is executed.
Typically it increments or decrements the loop variable by some value.
For example:

```java
i++
```

A `for` loop printing out the first four squares would look like this:

```java
for (int i = 1; i <= 4; i++) {
    System.out.println("square of " + i + " is " + i * i);
}
```

The output would be:

```text
square of 1 is 1
square of 2 is 4
square of 3 is 9
square of 4 is 16
```

> If iterating through every element in a collection, a `for-each` loop is preferred, but it can be done with a `for` loop like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Iterating through every element in a collection is usually performed using a `for-each`, but it can be done with a `for` loop like this:
```

- A `for-each` loop works on all collection types, including those that do not support using an index to access elements (eg. a `Set`).

## While

The `while` loop continually executes a block of statements while a particular condition is true.

```java
while (condition) {
    body;
}
```

The `condition` It's a statement that can be true or false. As long as the condition is true, the loop keeps running.
The `body` it's the code that gets executed repeatedly until the condition becomes false.

For example:

```java
int counter = 1;

while (counter <= 5) {
    System.out.println(counter);
    counter++;
}
```

which outputs:

```text
1
2
3
4
5
```

Generally good rule of thumb is to use a `while` loops when you don't know exactly how many times you need to loop beforehand.

## Do-while

As `while` loops `do-while` loops are condition centric loops, but unlike a regular `while` loop, a `do-while` loop guarantees that the code inside the loop will run at least once, no matter what.

```java
do {
    body;
} while (condition);
```

For example:

```java
int counter = 1;

do {
    System.out.println(counter);
    counter++;
} while (counter < 2);
```

which outputs:

```text
1
```

> ## Break

Author: Done!

for(char vowel: vowels) {
    System.out.println(vowel);
}
```

which outputs:

```text
a
e
i
o
u
```

Generally a `for-each` loop is preferrable over a `for` loop for the following reasons:

- A `for-each` loop is guaranteed to iterate over _all_ values.
- A `for-each` loop is more _declarative_ meaning the code is communicating _what_ it is doing, instead of _how_ it is doing it.
- A `for-each` loop is foolproof, whereas with `for` loops it is easy to have an off-by-one error (think of using `<` versus `<=`).
- A `for-each` loop works on all collection types, including those that do not support using an index to access elements (eg. a `Set`).

## While

The `while` loop continually executes a block of statements while a particular condition is true.

```java
while (condition) {
    body;
}
```

The `condition` It's a statement that can be true or false. As long as the condition is true, the loop keeps running.
The `body` it's the code that gets executed repeatedly until the condition becomes false.

For example:

```java
int counter = 1;

while (counter <= 5) {
    System.out.println(counter);
    counter++;
}
```

which outputs:

```text
1
2
3
4
5

> ```

Reviewer 2: I would add a small explanation on the similarity of both loops --->
--------

Notice that while loop is equivalent to the following:

```java
for (int counter = 1; counter <= 5; counter++) {
    System.out.println(counter);
}
```

Reviewer 2: In general, the same control flow can be expressed using either a `while` or a `for` loop.

```java
do {
    body;
} while (condition);
```

For example:

```java
int counter = 1;

do {
    System.out.println(counter);
    counter++;
} while (counter < 2);
```

which outputs:

```text
1
```

## Loop control statements

Loop control statements are special keywords used within loops to alter the normal execution flow.

### Break

The break statement acts as an "exit door" for a looping construct.
When encountered within the loop's body, `break` immediately terminates the loop's execution.

For example:

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    if (i == 5) {
        break;
    }

    System.out.println(i);
}
```

which outputs:

```text
0
1
2
3
4
```

### Continue

The continue statement on the other hand acts similar to a "skip button" in a looping construct.
When encountered within a loop's body, `continue` skips the remaining statements in the current iteration.

For exmaple:

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
    if (i < 3) {
        continue;
    }

    System.out.println(i);
}
```

which outputs:

> 

Reviewer 2: ## Using `break` and `continue` is discouraged

However, using a `break` inside a loop is not recommended, as it might make the code difficult to read. A boolean variable, usually called a `flag`, can be used instead:

```java
boolean showNumber = true;
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    if (i == 5) {
        showNumber = false;
    }

    if (showNumber) {
        System.out.println(i);
    }
}
```

or using a while loop:

```java
int i = 0;
boolean showNumber = true;
while (i < 10) {
    if (i == 5) {
        showNumber = false;
    }

    if (showNumber) {
        System.out.println(i);
    }
    i++;
}
```

Reviewer 3: I think it is fine the way it is now. I have definitely heard we shouldn't use `break` and `continue` before, but I don't think this is universal and they are used in projects. Examples can be seen in some well known Java open source projects, like [Spring](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-data-jpa/blob/0187162bfaae9eb3033093e9041b989312f4d036/spring-data-jpa/src/main/java/org/springframework/data/jpa/repository/query/QueryTransformers.java#L52), [Maven](https://github.com/apache/maven/blob/69980eeafcb1c0371e48df89953390b6d939d61a/impl/maven-impl/src/main/java/org/apache/maven/impl/AbstractNode.java#L41) and even [Eclipse](https://github.com/eclipse-platform/eclipse.platform/blob/083f7afd5a2665b4418ae74503823f44093b40fc/ua/org.eclipse.help.webapp/src/org/eclipse/help/internal/webapp/servlet/DynamicXHTMLFilter.java#L120). Even when I try Google on this subject I get answers for both sides, like in the discussion on [this](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/58237/are-break-and-continue-bad-programming-practices) one or [this](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18188123/is-it-bad-practice-to-use-break-to-exit-a-loop-in-java) one. Given the differing opinions and the usages out there, I'm wary of saying don't use `breaks` and `continue`.

Author: I agree with @kahgoh I think the addition of `break` and `continue` are valuable for the exercise and the topic
